Lyn 17890 tiaf dev docs (#2339)
o3de/o3de.org: content/docs/engine-dev/tools/tiaf/maintaining-tiaf/debugging-tiaf.md

---
linkTitle: Debugging TIAF Issues
title: Debugging Information
description: Information as to how to debug the TIAF.
---

# How do I configure and install OpenCppCoverage?

> The TIAF uses a fork of [OpenCppCoverage](https://github.com/OpenCppCoverage/OpenCppCoverage) as the instrumentation for native test targets on the Windows platform. In order to build the forked version of OpenCppCoverage, clone the [fork](https://github.com/jonawals/OpenCppCoverage.git) and checkout the branch `SourceLevelCoverage`. From here, you can follow the [standard instructions](https://github.com/OpenCppCoverage/OpenCppCoverage/wiki) for building OpenCppCoverage.

Reviewer: Write instructions in step-by-step format
```suggestion
The test impact analysis framework (TIAF) uses a fork of [OpenCppCoverage](https://github.com/OpenCppCoverage/OpenCppCoverage) as the instrumentation for native test targets on the Windows platform. 

To build the forked version of OpenCppCoverage:
1. Clone the [fork](https://github.com/jonawals/OpenCppCoverage.git)
2. Checkout the branch `SourceLevelCoverage`. 
3. Follow the build instructions in [OpenCppCoverage Wiki](https://github.com/OpenCppCoverage/OpenCppCoverage/wiki).
```

> # How do I reproduce a TIAF AR run locally?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How do I reproduce a TIAF AR run locally?
```

{{< note >}}
Prior to running TIAF locally, you must [clone and build the OpenCppCoverage fork](./debuffing-tiaf/#how-do-i-configure-and-install-opencppcoverage) and [enable the TIAF at the CMake level](./general-information/#how-do-i-turn-the-tiaf-onoff-in-automated-review). 
{{< /note >}}

> In order to reproduce a TIAF run locally we must first obtain all of the environmental information about the run. We can do this by navigating to the appropriate Jenkins build and clicking on either the `test_impact_analysis_profile_native` or `test_impact_analysis_profile_python` stages to retrieve the console output. At the very top of the console output, we will see the output of the TIAF AR scripts prior to the invocation of the appropriate runtime, like so:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To reproduce a TIAF run locally, you must first obtain all of the environmental information about the run. You can do this by navigating to the appropriate Jenkins build and clicking on either the `test_impact_analysis_profile_native` or `test_impact_analysis_profile_python` stages to retrieve the console output. At the very top of the console output, you will see the output of the TIAF AR scripts prior to the invocation of the appropriate runtime, like so:
```

[2023-03-30T09:42:24.147Z] [2023-03-30 09:42:23,906][TIAF][INFO] Change list is set to: D:\workspace\o3de\build\windows\bin\TestImpactFramework\profile\Temp\Python\changelist.76aeff41529f498297bf8194d38d5414.json
[2023-03-30T09:42:24.147Z] [2023-03-30 09:42:23,906][TIAF][INFO] Sequencer report file is set to: D:\workspace\o3de\build\windows\bin\TestImpactFramework\profile\Temp\Python\Reports\report.76aeff41529f498297bf8194d38d5414.json
[2023-03-30T09:42:24.147Z] [2023-03-30 09:42:23,906][TIAF][INFO] Test target output capture is set to: stdout
[2023-03-30T09:42:24.147Z] [2023-03-30 09:42:23,906][TIAF][INFO] Test runner policy is set to: live
[2023-03-30T09:42:24.147Z] [2023-03-30 09:42:23,906][TIAF][INFO] Args: --sequence=tia --fpolicy=continue --suites=main,smoke --labelexcludes=REQUIRES_gpu --changelist=D:\workspace\o3de\build\windows\bin\TestImpactFramework\profile\Temp\Python\changelist.76aeff41529f498297bf8194d38d5414.json --report=D:\workspace\o3de\build\windows\bin\TestImpactFramework\profile\Temp\Python\Reports\report.76aeff41529f498297bf8194d38d5414.json --targetout=stdout --testrunner=live
```

> In the log above, we can extract all of the information about the AR run and runtime invocation as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the log above, you can extract the following information about the AR run and runtime invocation:
```

C:/dev/o3de-tiaf-feature-python/Code/Framework/AzFramework/Tests/ArchiveCompressionTests.cpp(177): error: Expected: (nullptr) != (pArchive), actual: (nullptr) vs 8-byte object <00-00 00-00 00-00 00-00>
C:\dev\o3de-tiaf-feature-python\Code\Framework\AzCore\AzCore/std/smart_ptr/intrusive_ptr.h(189): error: You can't dereference a null pointer

Shard: ==================================================================
```

The above warning prints out the last 500 characters of standard output produced by that shard's process. Critically, we can see that the Google Test log ends abruptly with the line `error: You can't dereference a null pointer` rather than the usual test summary of a Google Test target that terminated gracefully. This is the smoking gun we need, as it clearly shows the test `ArchiveCompression/ArchiveCompressionTestFixture.TestArchivePacking_CompressionWithOverridenArchiveData_PackIsValid/5` crashing. If we were to look at the source code for that test and we see any sort of file access, we can be almost certain that this is the race condition between the shards causing the crash:

> 

Reviewer: Separated this from the paragraph above to stand out better.

```suggestion
Here is the source code for the crashing test:

```

    auto pArchive = archive->OpenArchive(testArchivePath.c_str());
    EXPECT_NE(nullptr, pArchive);

    for (int j = 0; j < iterations; ++j)
    {
        for (int currentSize = maxSize; currentSize >= 0; currentSize -= stepSize)
        {
            auto fnBuffer = AZ::StringFunc::Path::FixedString::format("file-%i-%i.dat", currentSize, j);
            EXPECT_TRUE(pArchive->UpdateFile(fnBuffer, checkSums.data(), currentSize, compressionMethod, compressionLevel) == 0);
        }
    }
```

At the top of the test we can see this test (and all permutations of this test) reading and writing to the file `@usercache@/archivetest.pak`. Searching for this string throughout this file we can find four other tests using this file that will also need to be fixed. The approach to fixing race conditions between processes is different from fixing race conditions between threads. Firstly, we cannot simply wrap the resource in a mutex as the processes do not share the same address space, nor can we use static state to increment a file counter for each test for the same reason. Instead, we must create a unique identifier at runtime for each test without sharing any state between the tests.

> ### Implementing a process-safe fix for the race condition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Implementing a process-safe fix for the race condition
```

> In order to create a unique file name for each process, we can either use `AZ::Uuid::Create()` as the random component for our filename, however in this particular instance there is an even simpler fix using `AZ::Test::ScopedAutoTempDirectory`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a unique file name for each process, you can either use `AZ::Uuid::Create()` as the random component for your filename, or do a simpler fix using `AZ::Test::ScopedAutoTempDirectory`.
```

> Firstly, we add a member of type `AZ::Test::ScopedAutoTempDirectory` called `m_tempDirectory` to `ArchiveCompressionTestFixture`. Then, in the constructor body, we add the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create unique file names using `AZ::Test::ScopedAutoTempDirectory`:
1. Add a member of type `AZ::Test::ScopedAutoTempDirectory` called `m_tempDirectory` to `ArchiveCompressionTestFixture`. 
2. In the constructor body, add the following:
```

```c++
ArchiveCompressionTestFixture()
    : m_application { AZStd::make_unique<AzFramework::Application>() }
{
    // Create a unique alias to the user cache directory to avoid race conditions between
    // concurrent invocations of this test target running these tests
    AZ::IO::FileIOBase* fileIo = AZ::IO::FileIOBase::GetInstance();
    fileIo->SetAlias("@usercache@", m_tempDirectory.GetDirectory());
}
```

> What this does is alias `@usercache@` to a folder with a unique name in the OS temp folder that will be cleaned up after the test target has completed. With this fix in place, we can now use `AzFramework.Tests` with the sharding optimization enabled without any further crashes due to file race conditions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This code aliases `@usercache@` to a folder with a unique name in the OS temp folder that will be cleaned up after the test target has completed. With this fix in place, you can now use `AzFramework.Tests` with the sharding optimization enabled without any further crashes due to file race conditions.
```

> # How do I fix regressions with the TIAF Python unit tests?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How do I fix regressions with the TIAF Python unit tests?
```

> If any tests starting with the name `TestTiaf` or as part of `test_tiaf_unit_tests.py` start failing you will need to configure your environment to run the TIAF Python unit tests. Conveniently, this process is largely the same as running any O3DE Python test so you can use the following tests to debug any failing Python test that is run in AR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If any tests starting with the name `TestTiaf` or as part of `test_tiaf_unit_tests.py` start to fail, you must configure your environment to run the TIAF Python unit tests. Conveniently, this process is similar as running any O3DE Python test, so you can use the following tests to debug any failing Python test that is run in AR.
```

### Configuring the environment

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

If you find tests start failing, you must look to the test suite in `scripts/build/TestImpactAnalysis/Testing`:

> `test_tiaf_tools.py` contains the relevant tests for the Storage Query Tool.
> 
> `test_tiaf_unit_tests.py`  contains the relevant tests for the TIAF python scripts.
> 
> `conftest.py` contains the fixtures that are used by both test scripts, and is a good place to start when updating tests with new features and command arguments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `test_tiaf_tools.py` contains the relevant tests for the Storage Query Tool.

- `test_tiaf_unit_tests.py`  contains the relevant tests for the TIAF python scripts.

- `conftest.py` contains the fixtures that are used by both test scripts, and is a good place to start when updating tests with new features and command arguments.
```

> This example config snippet will allow you to run TIAF pytests locally in vscode. Just copy and paste it into your existing `settings.json` (or create it if need be):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example config snippet allows you to run TIAF pytests locally in VS Code. Simply copy and paste it into your existing `settings.json` (or create it if needed):
```

```json
{
    "python.testing.pytestEnabled": true,
    "python.testing.unittestEnabled": false,
    "python.testing.pytestArgs": [
        "scripts/build/TestImpactAnalysis/Testing/",
        "--ignore=AutomatedTesting/Gem/PythonTests/Multiplayer",
        "--continue-on-collection-errors",
        "--build-directory=build/windows_vs2019/bin/profile",
    ]
}
```

> # How do I disable a problematic test target from being run by the TIAF?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How do I disable a problematic test target from being run by the TIAF?
```

> If for whatever reason you need to disable a problematic test from running in the TIAF (and thus moving it back over to CTest), simply locate the offending test target's registration in CMake and remove the `REQUIRES_tiaf` label.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need to disable a problematic test from running in the TIAF (and thus moving it back over to CTest), simply locate the offending test target's registration in CMake and remove the `REQUIRES_tiaf` label.
```

> For example, below is a fictional test target that has been enrolled in the TIAF:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, suppose this test target is enrolled in the TIAF:
```

```
ly_add_googletest(
    NAME AZ::Fictional.Tests
    LABELS REQUIRES_tiaf
)
```

> In order to opt this test out of the TIAF, we remove the pertinent label, like so:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To opt this test out of the TIAF, remove the pertinent label, like so:
```

---

> linkTitle: Debugging Issues

Author: Fixed 👍

title: Debugging Information
description: Information as to how to debug the TIAF.
---

# How do I configure and install OpenCppCoverage?

> The TIAF uses a fork of [OpenCppCoverage](https://github.com/OpenCppCoverage/OpenCppCoverage) as the instrumentation for native test targets on the Windows platform. In order to build the forked version of OpenCppCoverage, clone the [fork](https://github.com/jonawals/OpenCppCoverage.git) and checkout the branch `SourceLevelCoverage`. Form here, you can follow the [standard instructions](https://github.com/OpenCppCoverage/OpenCppCoverage/wiki) for building OpenCppCoverage.

Author: Fixed 👍

# How do I reproduce a TIAF AR run locally?

{{< note >}}
Prior to running TIAF locally, you must [clone and build the OpenCppCoverage fork](./debuffing-tiaf/#how-do-i-configure-and-install-opencppcoverage) and [enable TIAF at the CMake level](./general-information/#how-do-i-turn-the-tiaf-onoff-in-automated-review). 
{{< /note >}}

> In order to reproduce a TIAF run locally we must first obtain all of the environmental information about the run. We can do this by navigating to the appropriate Jenkins build anc clicking on either the `test_impact_analysis_profile_native` or `test_impact_analysis_profile_python` stages to retrieve the console output. At the very top of the console output, we will see the output of the TIAF AR scripts prior to the invocation of the appropriate runtime, like so:

Author: Fixed 👍

> In order to reproduce a TIAF run locally we must first obtain all of the environmental information about the run. We can do this by navigating to the appropriate Jenkins build anc clicking on either the `test_impact_analysis_profile_native` or `test_impact_analysis_profile_python` stages to retrieve the console output. At the very top of the console output, we will see the output of the TIAF AR scripts prior to the invocation of the appropriate runtime, like so:

Author: Fixed 👍

```

In the log above, we can extract all of the information about the AR run and runtime invocation as follows:

1. The arguments used to invoke the AR script were as follows:

```
--config="%OUTPUT_DIRECTORY%/bin/TestImpactFramework/profile/Persistent/tiaf.json" --src-branch=%BRANCH_NAME% --dst-branch=%CHANGE_TARGET% --commit=%CHANGE_ID% --s3-bucket=%TEST_IMPACT_S3_BUCKET% --mars-index-prefix=o3de-tiaf --s3-top-level-dir=%REPOSITORY_NAME% --build-number=%BUILD_NUMBER% --suites smoke main --label-excludes REQUIRES_gpu --test-failure-policy=continue --runtime-type=python --testrunner=live --target-output=stdout
```

2. The source branch was `stabilization/2305`.
3. The destination branch was empty, indicating a branch build as opposed to a PR build.
4. As this is a branch build, it is considered a source of truth for persistent storage.

> 5. The commit being build was `59e24a62859ce8a932e338f36432e3228621c1ec`.

Author: Fixed 👍

6. Test impact analysis had been enabled and thus will attempt to perform selective test runs using the historic coverage data.
7. The bucket used for the persistent storage was `o3de-tiaf` and the location of this branch's historic data is `o3de/o3de/python/stabilization/2305/profile/main-smoke/historic_data.json.zip`.
8. Historic data was successfully retrieved from the above location.
9. The last AR run for this branch was for commit `26273c22ff71950eb68d137fed25125ebbaa12d6`, which is 1 commit away from `59e24a62859ce8a932e338f36432e3228621c1ec`.
10. A change list was constructed for the changes between the above two commits, resulting in `0` created files, `4` updated files and `0` deleted files.
11. The test failure policy was set to `continue` and the test suites that tests would be selected from were `main` and `smoke`.
12. Any test targets with the label `REQUIRES_gpu` were excluded from test selection.

> 13. The test target output was routed to the Jenkins concole output.

Author: Fixed 👍

14. The live Python test runner was used (this feature is deprecated).
15. The arguments used to invoke the Python runtime were a follows:

```
--sequence=tia --fpolicy=continue --suites=main,smoke --labelexcludes=REQUIRES_gpu --changelist=D:\workspace\o3de\build\windows\bin\TestImpactFramework\profile\Temp\Python\changelist.76aeff41529f498297bf8194d38d5414.json --report=D:\workspace\o3de\build\windows\bin\TestImpactFramework\profile\Temp\Python\Reports\report.76aeff41529f498297bf8194d38d5414.json --targetout=stdout --testrunner=live
```

To reproduce this particular AR run, we would perform the following steps:

1. Check out the commit `59e24a62859ce8a932e338f36432e3228621c1ec`.

> 2. Use the [storage query tool]() to retrieve the relevant historic data fot this run.

Author: Fixed 👍

3. Build the commit.
4. Place the historic data in the local historic data folder (see the historic workspace entry in any of the tiaf.json files in the TestImpactFramework folder in your build directory).
5. Run the TIAF AR script with the the following arguements (omitting the S3 bucket so that local persistent storage is used):

```
--config=<path to your config file> --src-branch=stabilization/2305 --dst-branch= --commit=59e24a62859ce8a932e338f36432e3228621c1ec --mars-index-prefix=o3de-tiaf --build-number=<pick any number> --suites smoke main --label-excludes REQUIRES_gpu --test-failure-policy=continue --runtime-type=python --testrunner=live --target-output=stdout
```

> Alternatively, the runtime itself may be explicitely invoked (and a debugger attached) using the following steps:

Author: Fixed 👍

1. Check out the commit `59e24a62859ce8a932e338f36432e3228621c1ec`.

> 2. Use the [storage query tool]() to retrieve the relevant historic data fot this run.

Author: Fixed 👍

5. Run the Python runtime with the same arguments as the TIAF run that failed:

```
--sequence=tia --fpolicy=continue --suites=main,smoke --labelexcludes=REQUIRES_gpu --changelist=<path to your build folder>\bin\TestImpactFramework\profile\Temp\Python\changelist.76aeff41529f498297bf8194d38d5414.json --report=D:\workspace\o3de\build\windows\bin\TestImpactFramework\profile\Temp\Python\Reports\report.76aeff41529f498297bf8194d38d5414.json --targetout=stdout --testrunner=live
```

# How do I kill a local test run of the TIAF?

Often, when a run of TIAF is aborted by the user, there are still test target processes invoked by TIAF lingering around. In order to terinate all processes, we must terminate both the test runner processes and the instrumentation processes.

To terminate the test runner processes, use the following command:

```
taskkill /f /im AzTestRunner.exe
```

To terminate the instrumentation processes, use the following command:

```
taskkill /f /im OpenCppCoverage.exe
```

# How do I debug a flakey sharded test target?

> A flakey sharded test is a sharded test target of which one or more of the target's shards have crashed due to race conditions with other shards. As each shard is its own separate processes, the race conditions are not be due to memory corruption in the same address space as per typical mutlithreaded race conditions but instead are due to one or more of the shard processes attempting to access and mutate a common resource such as a file. Although it cannot be stated with absolute certainty that all shard race conditions are due to conflicting file accesses, all of the race conditions detected and fixed during the sharded test optimization development process were due to this. Thus, as a first point of call, if you have a flakey, sharded test target, check for file race conditions first.

Author: Fixed 👍

## Case Study: `AzFramework.Tests` Race Conditions

> In order to demonstrate the best practices for troubleshooting and fixing flakey sharded test targets, we will troubleshoot and fix a real world example of such a flakey test target: `AzFramework.Tests`. As this test target has already been fixed, you can instead checkout commit `66c894f9fe15ce4cc1c1afe5ca9dbac30fde63fa` for reference which definitely does not have the fix in question.

Author: Fixed 👍

### Diagnosing the offending test

> Prior to the fix in place, when this test target was opted in to TIAF and opted in to test sharding optimization, it would frequently crash due to the sharding. In order to identify the likely suspect test(s) causing the race conditions, we can search the log for the string `Possible file race condition detected for test target`, whereupon we find the following warning message:

Author: Fixed 👍

Shard: Possible file race condition detected for test target 'AzFramework.Tests' on shard '23', backtrace of std out for last 500 characters (check for properly terminated test log output):
ckIsValid/5 (1490 ms)
[ RUN      ] ArchiveCompression/ArchiveCompressionTestFixture.TestArchivePacking_CompressionWithOverridenArchiveData_PackIsValid/5
C:/dev/o3de-tiaf-feature-python/Code/Framework/AzFramework/Tests/ArchiveCompressionTests.cpp(177): error: Expected: (nullptr) != (pArchive), actual: (nullptr) vs 8-byte object <00-00 00-00 00-00 00-00>
C:\dev\o3de-tiaf-feature-python\Code\Framework\AzCore\AzCore/std/smart_ptr/intrusive_ptr.h(189): error: You can't dereference a null pointer

Shard: ==================================================================
```

> The above warning prints out the last 500 characters of standard output produced by that shard's process. Critically, we can see that the Google Test log ends abruptly with the line `error: You can't dereference a null pointer` rather than the usual test summary of a Google Test target that terminated gracefully. This is the smoking gun we need, as it clearly show the test `ArchiveCompression/ArchiveCompressionTestFixture.TestArchivePacking_CompressionWithOverridenArchiveData_PackIsValid/5` crashing. If we were to look at the source code for that test and we see any sort of file access, we can be almost certain that this is the race condition between the shards causing the crash:

Author: Fixed 👍

### Implementing a process-safe fix for the race condition

In order to create a unique file name for each process, we can either use `AZ::Uuid::Create()` as the random component for our filename, however in this particular instance there is an even simpler fix using `AZ::Test::ScopedAutoTempDirectory`.

Firstly, we add a member of type `AZ::Test::ScopedAutoTempDirectory` called `m_tempDirectory` to `ArchiveCompressionTestFixture`. Then, in the constructor body, we add the following:

```c++
ArchiveCompressionTestFixture()
    : m_application { AZStd::make_unique<AzFramework::Application>() }
{
    // Create a unique alias to the user cache directory to avoid race conditions between
    // concurrent invocations of this test target running these tests
    AZ::IO::FileIOBase* fileIo = AZ::IO::FileIOBase::GetInstance();
    fileIo->SetAlias("@usercache@", m_tempDirectory.GetDirectory());
}
```

> What this does is alias `@usercache@` to a fodler with a unique name in the OS temp folder that will be cleaned up after the test target has completed. With this fix in place, we can now use `AzFramework.Tests` with the sharding optimization enabled without any further crashes due to file race conditions.

Author: Fixed 👍

# How do I fix regressions with the TIAF Python unit tests?

If any tests starting with the name `TestTiaf` or as part of `test_tiaf_unit_tests.py` start failing you will need to configure your environment to run the TIAF Python unit tests. Conveniently, this process is largely the same as running any O3DE Python test so you can use the following tests to debug any failing Python test that is run in AR.

### Configuring the environment

> 

Author: Fixed 👍

----

If you find  start failing, you must look to the test suite in `scripts/build/TestImpactAnalysis/Testing`

> test_tiaf_tools.py  contains the relevant tests for the Storage Query Tool, and

Author: Fixed 👍

test_tiaf_unit_tests.py  contains the relevant tests for the TIAF python scripts

conftest.py contains the fixtures that are used by both test scripts, and is a good place to start when updating tests with new features and command arguments.

> This example config snippet will allow you to run TIAF pytests locally in vscode. Just copy and paste it into your existing settings.json(or create it if need be)

Author: Fixed 👍

---
linkTitle: Debugging TIAF Issues
title: Debugging Information
description: Information as to how to debug the TIAF.
---

## How do I configure and install OpenCppCoverage?

The test impact analysis framework (TIAF) uses a fork of [OpenCppCoverage](https://github.com/OpenCppCoverage/OpenCppCoverage) as the instrumentation for native test targets on the Windows platform. 

To build the forked version of OpenCppCoverage:
1. Clone the [fork](https://github.com/jonawals/OpenCppCoverage.git)
2. Checkout the branch `SourceLevelCoverage`. 
3. Follow the build instructions in [OpenCppCoverage Wiki](https://github.com/OpenCppCoverage/OpenCppCoverage/wiki).

## How do I reproduce a TIAF AR run locally?

{{< note >}}

> Prior to running TIAF locally, you must [clone and build the OpenCppCoverage fork](./debuffing-tiaf/#how-do-i-configure-and-install-opencppcoverage) and [enable the TIAF at the CMake level](./general-information/#how-do-i-turn-the-tiaf-onoff-in-automated-review). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prior to running TIAF locally, you must [clone and build the OpenCppCoverage fork](./debugging-tiaf/#how-do-i-configure-and-install-opencppcoverage) and [enable the TIAF at the CMake level](./general-information/#how-do-i-turn-the-tiaf-onoff-in-automated-review). 
```
